[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The simpler the food, the
healthier the food for you.
Convenience foods and
convenience packaging
are useful at times.
But living a life of convenience
food just sets us up.
It sets us up to have
dysfunction wherever
the weak link in our chain is.
Here's the way to
get the big picture
about intestinal permeability.
Permeability is not bad for you.
It's how we absorb our
vitamins and minerals.
It's excessive permeability
that's bad for you.
Intestinal
permeability is normal.
Excessive intestinal
permeability is abnormal.
So what does that mean?
Your intestines are a tube.
The tube is 20, 25 feet long.
Starts at the mouth,
goes to the other end.
Kind of winds around
in the abdomen,
twists around in there.
The inside-- if you think of
your intestines like a donut,
and if you could just
stretch the donut out,
and you look down the
hole of the donut,
it's one big long donut, right?
It's one big long tube.
So when we eat food,
it's not yet in our body.
It's in the donut.
Right.
And it's got to go through
the walls of the donut
to get into the bloodstream
so we can use the vitamins
and minerals to make new
brain cells, and muscle cells,
and all of that.
The inside of the tube is
lined with shag carpeting,
big thick shags of carpeting.
They're called the villi
and the microvilli.
The microvilli are coated
with a cheese cloth.
And our grandmothers
used to pour gravy
into a cheesecloth and the
liquid would come through.
And the clumps of flour and
stuff that didn't break down
would stay on the
other side so the gravy
was very smooth to pour on
the pot roast and everything.
That's cheesecloth.
Our shags in the intestines
have cheesecloth.
That's why your intestines
are 20 to 25 feet long.
One reason is because some
foods break down really quickly.
Other foods take a long
time to break down.
They have to go further
down the intestines.
Proteins are like
a pearl necklace.
Hydrochloric acid
made in your stomach
undoes the clasp of
the pearl necklace.
Now you have a string of pearls.
Our enzymes act as
scissors to break off
each pearl of the
pearl necklace.
They're called amino acids.
They're really
tiny little pearls.
And they go right
through the cheesecloth
into the bloodstream.
Bigger clumps of pearls can't
get through the cheesecloth.
They have to go further
down the intestines
to be broken down small enough
to get through the cheesecloth
into the bloodstream.
That's how we absorb our
vitamins, our minerals,
our proteins, our fats is that
they get broken down, broken
down, broken down, until
they're small enough to go right
through the cheesecloth.
What happens when
humans eat wheat?
Every human that eats
wheat, not just the celiacs,
but every human that
eats wheat, it's
tears in the cheesecloth every
time they're exposed to wheat.
But we have an entire new
body every seven years, right?
Some cells turn
over very quickly,
like the inside
lining of the gut.
Every three to seven days
you have a whole new lining
to your gut.
It's like the skin of a snake.
Just kind of sheds right off.
And some cells, like
your bone cells,
are very slow to rebuild.
So every seven years
you have a new body.
So you eat wheat, you tear
the cheesecloth but it heals.
Fastest growing
cells in the body.
So you had toast for breakfast.
It heals.
You have a sandwich for lunch.
Pasta for dinner, it heals.
Croutons on your salad.
It heals.
A cookie.
But it heals day
after week after month
after year after year after
year until one day you
don't heal anymore.
Now when you don't heal, you
get tears in the cheesecloth.
That's pathogenic
intestinal permeability.
Now what happens you've got
these pearl necklaces of food
being clipped into
small pieces going down
the tube of the intestines,
down the donut, all the way
until they're small enough to
go through the cheesecloth.
But now some of these
larger clumps of food
get through the tears
of the cheesecloth
into the bloodstream.
They're not supposed to.
They're called
macromolecules, big molecules.
They're not supposed
to get through.
But tears in the
cheesecloth occur.
And these tears
in the cheesecloth
can occur and stay torn.
When you lose tolerance,
you don't heal anymore
when you're two years old,
22 years old, 72 years old.
It just depends on when you
cross that threshold as to when
this happens.
But it happens for everyone.
So now you've got the tears in
cheesecloth that don't heal.
The macromolecules get
through into the bloodstream.
And your immune system
says, whoa, what's this?
This is not something
that's good for me.
I better fight this.
I can't make new brain cells
or new muscle cells out
of this raw material.
I better fight this.
And now you make antibodies
to that macromolecule.
And if it was a tomato, now
you're sensitive to tomatoes,
or now you're
sensitive to chicken,
or now you're sensitive
to beef, or to bananas.
It doesn't matter what it is.
If you get macromolecules
getting into the bloodstream,
your immune system
trying to protect you
says I got to fight this thing.
This is not good for me.
That's the person that
gets a 90 food IgG blood
test done for sensitivities.
And it comes back, they're
sensitive to 20, 25 foods.
They say, oh my god,
that's everything I eat.
Of course, it is.
Your immune system's
trying to protect you.
So you don't shut down
the immune system.
You stop throwing
gasoline on the fire
and allow the tears in
the cheesecloth to heal.
Then six months to a year later,
you do the blood test again.
Now you're sensitive to
two foods, maybe three.
So you want to have a healthy
environment of your gut, that's
called the microbiome,
because when
you have a bad
environment, you tear
the cheesecloth just because of
a bad environment in your gut.
So it's not only wheat
that tears the cheesecloth.
There are many, many things.
GMO foods will tear
the cheesecloth.
The glyphosate and the
inert ingredients in Roundup
will tear the cheesecloth.
Chlorine will tear
the cheesecloth.
There are many, many
different compounds
that can tear the cheesecloth.
We just know for a fact that
all humans tear the cheesecloth
when they eat wheat--
every time they eat wheat.
So when you cross
that threshold and you
can't compensate anymore
and heal the cheesecloth,
then you get pathogenic
intestinal permeability.
Remember intestinal permeability
is normal but excessive
permeability is not.
So now you get pathogenic
intestinal permeability.
It gets into your bloodstream.
Your body makes antibodies
to that food, whatever it is.
And then there's a mechanism
called crossreactivity.
So let's take the
example of wheat.
The most common clump
of the pearl necklace
that your immune system
will make antibodies to
is 33 amino acids long.
And every laboratory
in the world
will check for that one to see
if you make antibodies to that.
There are many other clumps
of the pearl necklace.
But in most labs don't check
the others, which they should.
We know there are 62
different clumps of the pearl
necklace in wheat that
have been identified
that the immune
system may react to.
But every lab checks
for the big one, the 33.
So if you have antibodies to
that 33 amino acid peptide--
it's called a peptide.
I'm going to refer
to it as AABCD.
Now it's 33 letters long,
but let's just say AABCD.
So now you have the antibodies
going through your bloodstream
looking for AABCD.
Over there.
And they're firing
these chemical bullets
to destroy this macromolecule
that's in your bloodstream.
What our immunologists
tell us is
that it only takes eight amino
acids of the 33, only eight.
That sequence of the eight
amino acids of the 33
that the antibodies
are being made to--
when your blood's
going past the thyroid,
for example, the surface of the
thyroid facing the bloodstream
as the blood's going by--
the surface of the thyroid
facing the bloodstream
is made up of proteins and fats.
Proteins are made up of a
lot of amino acids, hundreds
of amino acids.
Some of the amino acid
sequences in the surface
of the thyroid facing the
bloodstream include AABCD--
eight amino acids of AABCD.
So the antibodies
that are looking
for the weak molecules
in your bloodstream
see [INAUDIBLE] look over there.
And they fire a
chemical bullet at AABCD
on the surface of your thyroid
facing the bloodstream.
That's called molecular mimicry.
When our antibodies to
wheat fire a chemical bullet
at the thyroid in this
example, or your brain cells--
and the studies are very clear
on this stuff that it happens--
or your brain cells--
when it fires a chemical bullet,
it damages that thyroid cell.
Now the immune system
makes thyroid antibodies
in general to clean up
the old thyroid cells.
Right.
So you get rid of
the old thyroid
cells to make room
for new cells to grow.
That's why you have a
normal level of antibodies
to your brain, and to your
thyroid, and your heart,
because we're getting rid
of the old damaged cells,
making room for
new cells to grow.
So kind of a wash out process. .
Right.
That's normal.
But now you've got these
extra antibodies to AABCD
going after the thyroid.
Now you make more
antibodies to your thyroid
to get rid of these
extra damaged cells.
Right.
And that's not a problem except
you had toast for breakfast,
a sandwich for lunch, pasta for
dinner, croutons on your salad.
There is gluten in
the makeup in lipstick
that you use, in your
shampoo, so you're
getting exposure day
after day after week
after month after year
after year after year.
And if the weak link in
your chain is your thyroid,
it's going after your thyroid.
The antibodies to wheat are
also going after your thyroid.
You make more thyroid
antibodies to get rid
of those damaged cells.
And it's called a
self-perpetuating mechanism.
At some point, it
continues on its own.
Now you develop Hashimoto's
autoimmune thyroid disease.
That's why there are
so many studies that
say when you get off of
wheat, your thyroid antibodies
may go down.
That's the mechanism.
And it's the same
mechanism for the brain.
It's the same mechanism
for the heart.
That's why the studies I
referred to earlier, Mayo
Clinic with cardiomyopathy
and irregular heartbeats,
get them off wheat and their
cardiomyopathy calms down
and their heart starts
functioning better.
If we just wake up to this
and we start checking for it--
remember body
language never lies.
You just have to learn
how to speak body.
So you have to
have the laboratory
tests that are
properly looking to see
is this going on for you.
And if it's going on, OK, then
let's see why it's going on.
And then you get
rid of the trigger,
the gasoline on the fire.
And then many times, not
always but many times,
the rheumatoid
arthritis calms down.
The psoriasis calms down.
The lupus calms down.
The migraines calm down.
The attention deficit that
children suffer with calm down.
In the "Journal of Attention
Disorders" in 2006,
they took 130 kids with gluten
sensitivity and attention
deficit.
They put them on a
gluten free diet.
Every child or their
parents, all 130 of them
or their parents,
reported significant--
that's the big word--
significant improvement in all
12 attention deficit markers.
Fails to pay attention,
interrupts frequently, blurts
out answers, can't sit still.
Every marker improved
in every child
within six months on
a wheat-free diet.
And there are a couple
of recommendations
I do give to everyone
to do right now.
The first one is we have
health food stores here
in the US called Whole Foods.
And they're in some
other countries also.
But they tend to
be healthier foods.
Go to Whole Foods.
Buy five different kinds
of fermented vegetables.
Just make sure they're
not pasteurized,
because pasteurization
kills bacteria.
That you want the
fermented vegetables
because when vegetables
ferment, they
make the bacteria that are
the families in your gut.
We've got thousands
and thousands
of families in your gut.
And it doesn't matter how
much of one particular family
you've got.
What matters is how balanced
are all the families.
Is it a community?
And is your gut in a
community working together?
So you eat.
Walk by your
refrigerator every day.
Just take one forkful of one
of the fermented vegetables,
just one of them.
And every day switch them out.
So they've got
sauerkraut, kimchi,
curry flavored, Italian flavor.
Just get any-- get
a bunch of them.
And you take one forkful a
day, because every vegetable
that ferments is producing
different families
of good bacteria for you.
So you're inoculating every day.
That's the first thing you do.
The second thing is go
online, go to Google,
and type in list
of prebiotic foods.
And every day you
make sure to have
at least two prebiotic foods.
Not probiotic.
Prebiotic.
Because the prebiotic foods feed
the good bacteria in your gut.
They won't feed
the bad bacteria.
They feed the good
bacteria in your gut.
So you're inoculating
every day with a little bit
of good bacteria.
You're varying it so you're
not getting a dominance of one.
You're varying it every day.
And then every day
you're feeding it
with some of the good bacteria.
And you change it out.
Every week you change it out.
A good family event probiotics
include the root vegetables
such as sweet potatoes and yams.
Chinese yams are excellent
for you for many--
you wan to lose weight?
Eat Chinese yams.
Just read the science.
It's really clear, because the
Chinese yams and bitter melon,
those two together
feed good bacteria
in the gut that help
you lose weight.
For most people who are
trying to lose weight,
and they're having
difficulty, and they're really
being careful and they're
not losing weight,
it's because they've
created an environment
in the gut of bacteria that's
hoarding calories, storing
calories.
So you eat just a little
bit but your body stores it.
Well, you want the bacteria that
allows you to utilize calories
for the amount of energy
that you're putting out
and not store excess calories.
Chinese yams and
bitter melons do that.
So you alternate every
day the prebiotics
you eat, inoculate with
probiotics, and one hour
a week you read.
In six months,
you've got it down.
[MUSIC PLAYING]